---
layout: writing
title: "A Unified Theory of Attraction as Desire"
categories: Writing
permalink: /writing/attraction-as-desire
tags: Philosophy
description: "In this paper I aim to answer two main questions: 1. What is attraction? and 2. What does attraction occur toward? Toward the first question, I argue that sexual, romantic, platonic, and other types of attraction can be defined as desire to perform acts of a certain type with a specific person. In response to the second question, I argue that attraction happens as a result of a mostly automatic evaluation toward certain characteristics a specific person has or exhibits. Through the exploration of the concept of attraction, more clarity about on asexual and/or aromantic spectrum identities can be found."
---

In this paper I aim to answer two main questions: 1. What is attraction? and 2. What does attraction occur toward? Toward the first question, I argue that sexual, romantic, platonic, and other types of attraction can be defined as desire to perform acts of a certain type with a specific person. In response to the second question, I argue that attraction happens as a result of a mostly automatic evaluation toward certain characteristics a specific person has or exhibits. Through the exploration of the concept of attraction, more clarity about on asexual and/or aromantic spectrum identities can be found.

In the philosophical literature, discussions about the nature of attraction are fairly scant. However, one notion of attraction that is fairly well established is called interpersonal attraction which comes from the field of social psychology. From the International Encyclopedia of the Social & Behavioral Sciences it is defined as:

> a positive attitude or evaluation regarding a particular person, including the three components conventionally ascribed to attitudes: behavioral (tendency to approach the person), cognitive (positive beliefs about the person), and affective (positive feelings for the person) (Aron & Lewandowski 2001)

Let it be noted that while the definition uses the word attitude, it is different from a propositional attitude as discussed in philosophy. The definition entails more than just a person holding a certain attitude towards a proposition. While this definition may be suitable for a sociometric measurement use case to see the valence of one’s attitude toward a certain person, I do not think it stands up for explaining sexual, romantic, and/or platonic attraction. If anything, this conception of attraction seems like a preference towards a person more than anything else. I think that positive beliefs (cognitive component) towards the person, nor positive feelings toward the person (affective component) are necessary or sufficient conditions for attraction. To demonstrate this, consider the following case:

> Hate Sex: A person H has no feelings either way about the good-lookingness of a person L, but also has extremely strong feelings of hatred towards them. L also has feelings of hatred toward H as well, and this fact is known to H. As a result of this hatred, H wants to have sexual intercourse with L.

In this case, H certainly has neither positive feelings nor beliefs toward L, in fact, they are overwhelmingly negative. This just leaves the behavioral component of interpersonal attraction, the part about actually wanting to have sex with a person, as a necessary condition. Hence, I argue that the behavioral component is the only necessary condition, while the affective and cognitive components are neither necessary nor sufficient conditions to define something as attraction. As such, I wish to define attraction as follows:
Attraction: A desire to perform acts of type T (e.g: sexual, romantic, platonic, sensual) with a specific person formed by an automatic evaluation of that person’s characteristics.

An act of type T is anything that can be done with the intention of forming or reinforcing a relationship of type T. This comes from the desire-belief account of intention. There is a desire, attraction in this case, and then the belief is that this certain act can advance a relationship of type T. Drawing from Setiya’s Knowing How, to do an action A intentionally (with intentions to form a relationship of type T) is to do A because you believe that it will bring about a relationship of type T (Setiya 2012). This concept can be used to analyze relationships, which are connections between multiple people with symmetric intentions, but I am advancing this notion solely as a means to categorize actions into types.

In this way, a hug can be a sexual act because it can be done with the end of advancing a sexual relationship with someone. Some relationship types have certain acts that cannot be included by definition. An example of this is sensual relationships where people engage in physically intimate, but non-sexual acts (in the strict sense of involving sexual organs). For example: hugging, hand-holding, or cuddling. Likewise, traditional forms of sexual intercourse (oral, vaginal, anal, etc.) cannot be done with platonic intention either, i.e with the end of reinforcing a platonic (non-sexual and non-romantic) relationship, because by definition platonic relationships are non-sexual. This idea also explains the gray area between platonic and romantic intentions because the same things can be done for either type of relationship, with the only difference being the kind of relationship that is being aimed at.

I argue that the desire is towards engaging in acts rather than moving toward a relationship because I do not think that a relationship is always the desired outcome. For example, there are lithosexuals, people who experience a sense of attraction towards people, but do not wish for it to be reciprocated (“Lithosexual” 2018). In a similar vein, many times attraction is not so much a desire toward a relationship, but getting to know the person more to see if a relationship would be healthy/strong. One could ostensibly characterize this as forming a relationship, but I think that this is an incorrect characterization because a relationship is not always formed out of desire. However, I will concede that the desire to form a relationship with a person is heavily associated with attraction, which is a reason why many would mischaracterize their desire when introspecting.
A foreseeable objection to the Hate Sex example that I introduced previously would be that sexual attraction is fundementally different in nature, insofar as the example would not generalize to other forms of attraction (e.g. romantic or platonic). To rebut this, I advance the following hypothetical case:

> The Savior: S sees V get bullied incessantly by another student and notices that V has no friends as a result of being picked on all the time. S knows nothing else about V, but S wants to be V’s friend after seeing this. 

This is an example of platonic attraction; there is this pull (desire) to be V’s friend. Just like the Hate Sex example, S has no positive beliefs towards S and no positive feelings either (I would not classify pity as positive feelings toward someone). It seems like attraction is more Humean in that there still needs to be some kind of passion (emotion) towards a person, and that the desire to form a relationship with someone does not happen rationally.

However convincing this argument may be for some, I anticipate that some people will understandably not be swayed by just an example. I think the reason for this is people’s interchangeable conceptual use of sexual attraction and libido. Libido is the natural psychological and physiological drive for sex (also known as “sex drive”). Libido is towards no one in particular, it is just a desire for sexual pleasure. The reductionist account of sexual desire argues that sexual desire is simply a desire for bodily sexual pleasure. Even if this account is true, which Morgan in his paper, Sex in the Head, argues it is not, sexual attraction would be importantly distinct from this conception. Sexual attraction is instead the desire for sexual pleasure with a particular person, which is actually very similar to what Morgan argues (Morgan 2003). It is entirely possible for a person to cause physical arousal in the observer, but that does not necessitate the emergence of desire to have sex towards that particular person.

With the notion of attraction established, the question then becomes to what is attraction toward? In my definition of attraction, I state that it is in response to the characteristics of a certain person, which leads us to ask what kind of characteristics can a person be attracted to? By my analysis, there are a number of different kinds of characteristics a person possesses: What You Are (e.g. looks or group affiliation so: hair, race, gender/sex, personality, religion), What You Know (e.g. philosophy, history of China, cars), What You Can Do (e.g. cook, archery, write poetry), and also What You Have (e.g. money, citizenship). However, I argue that What You Know and What You Have reduce to What You Can Do because the characteristics are instrumental in that they allow someone to be able to do certain things. An interesting question that arises out of this discussion is if people are attracted literally to what someone has (e.g. money), or to a specific person because of what they have. We can explore this through the following case:

> The Gold Digger: A person D wants to enter a sexual and romantic relationship with an unmarried rich person S who is going to die soon. D wants to enter said relationship with S because they are respectful and kind to D and they have lots of money of which they would leave to their spouse upon death. 

While some might resist my characterization of this case, I argue that this is a legitimate case of attraction. For one, it’s specific. You could not switch out the object of attraction and have it be the same. There are dual intentions at play, but in relationships this is very often the case. There are many kinds of characteristics a person can be attracted to, of which I find it hard to suss out a reason why one is more (or less) legitimate than the others. However, I do not think that all cases of “gold diggers” are legitimate cases of attraction, I think that some people could only be in a relationship for the money, and the person who embodies the characteristic is not important to them at all.

Another part of my definition that needs to be expounded upon is the portion about automatic evaluation. It really is mostly automatic, and I say this because while sometimes attraction occurs against our best interests/rationality, other times attraction is responsive towards our beliefs and experiences. Consider the following scenario:

> The Anti-Vaxxer: B finds A an amazing person: they’re funny, smart, and good-looking. B wants to ask A out and form a sexual and romantic relationship with them, but soon B finds out A believes that vaccines are a ploy by the government to insert microchips in its citizens. This results in B no longer wanting to associate with A.

In this scenario, B can be said to have lost attraction to A. While nothing about A’s appearance or personality has changed in any way, B has gained information about A which results in a reappraisal of their characteristics. My definition captures this idea of loss of attraction through evaluations of characteristics, and in doing so I think it captures a lot of the folk view of attraction and everyday linguistic usage. People say that they still find their old partners good-looking or nice people, but they would not want to re-enter a relationship with them and do the things that they used to do together.

There are all kinds of ways that you can have positive evaluations of the characteristics of a person that fail to be attraction (i.e. do not produce desire). In the context of sexual attraction (or rather non-attraction), you can find someone good-looking without wanting to have sex with them. This is commonly referred to as “aesthetic attraction” in mainstream asexual discourse, but I will refer to it as positive aesthetic appraisal because it fails to be attraction under my definition that I set forth earlier. In terms of platonic relationships, we could call the positive appraisal of a person admiration. This means that you really like certain characteristics of a person, but that doesn’t imply that you want to be their friend. This is an example of platonic non-attraction. Since attraction is about an appraisal that gives way to intention, this kind of occurrence has analogs in all types of attraction.

To conclude this paper, I will attempt to tie together some loose ends and point at potential future work. My work in this paper lends strong evidence to the split-attraction model, which states that romance and sexual attraction/orientation are different spectra (Insert citation). However, I will not attempt to define orientation in terms of attraction, because I believe that Dembroff in their paper What is Sexual Orientation? presents a strong case to allow for a wider base of desires or other psychological bases to ground orientation, sexual or otherwise (Dembroff 2016). I think that an interesting empirical/experimental study that could be done would be to survey allosexuals and alloromantics as well as asexuals and aromantics and people in between to see how they feel about this definition of attraction.

## Works Cited
Aron, A., & Lewandowski, G. (2001). Interpersonal Attraction, Psychology of. International Encyclopedia of the Social & Behavioral Sciences, 7860–7862. doi:10.1016/b0-08-043076-7/01787-3  
Dembroff, R. A. (2016). What is Sexual Orientation? Philosophers' Imprint, 16(3), 1–27.   
Lithosexual. LGBTA Wiki. (2018, July 1). [https://lgbta.wikia.org/wiki/Lithosexual](https://lgbta.wikia.org/wiki/Lithosexual).   
Morgan, S. (2003). Sex in the Head. Journal of Applied Philosophy, 20(1), 1–16. [https://doi.org/10.1111/1468-5930.00231](https://doi.org/10.1111/1468-5930.00231)
Setiya, K. (2012). XIV - Knowing How. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society (Hardback), 112(3), 285–307. [https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9264.2012.00336.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9264.2012.00336.x)
